How are you doing? Today is November the 16th. And I
am visiting with Dr. Phil Limbacher, professor
emeritus of educational curriculum and
instruction. And he was appointed to Texas A&M in
1969. And we're going to talk about his
perceptions of the College of Education since its
inception, which happens to be in 1969, the same
year that you started. And I would like to know, a
little bit about how you perceived the changes
during the time that you were involved with the
college. I
came to the college, as you indicated earlier, the
very first day that it was an official college, a
separate college of education. And I never
regretted it. I came to it from the College of
Education at the University of Illinois. And my
first perceptions and the reason I was drawn to it
was the, I guess for want of anything better, the
collegial atmosphere you had. Without
denigrating the University of Illinois, it was
more of a dog-eat-dog kind of society. faculty
carved out a small domain of the discipline and
felt that it was theirs and theirs only to mine and
if anybody moved into it there was a great deal of
cat-and-dog fighting and I did not see that down
here and
I hope that the college avoids that type of
attitude as we move along. That was my first
revealing change between the two colleges.
Just as an aside, one of the things that was amusing
to me,
the observation of Labor Day at Champaign-Urbana
was a holiday. the observation of Labor Day at
Texas A&M was a duty day. And I recall very vividly
the movers had moved and were moving all of our
belongings into our newly purchased home in
Bryan. And my wife was trying to handle the problem
when I was at the university working. So I remember
old Dean Hubert coming along at about that time and
visiting with me and facetiously saying, what was
I doing here? Why wasn't I somewhere else? Did Dean
Hubert recruit you, or how did you happen to come to
A&M? I had become less than enamored with the
climate in Illinois, and my wife's home is down in
the valley, and I spent a good deal of World War II
fighting it here in the state, which was a very much
nicer place to fight World War II than most. And I
enjoyed the state and was hoping to retire from the
military to it. And I had put in for positions.
Texas A&M had advertised a position, and the
University of Texas had advertised a position.
And I can give you a little anecdote to show why I am
very definitely opposed to Texas, the University
of Texas. And it's also an indication of how far our
society has gone. I made the applications and
received a very short and terse letter from the
University of Texas indicating that At this time,
the university was not recruiting people of my age
bracket. I was too old for the position. I don't
know. I was 50-some-what, I guess, at the time. I
came to this thing a little later than usual.
University of Texas A&M, on the other hand, and the
letter was signed by, I think, Glenn Johnson, who
was the department head at the time, indicating
that the position had been filled,
He would keep my application on file. And the
position I was looking for at that time was student
teaching placement. And what little expertise I
had was in the area of using videotapes.
Micro-teaching, they called it at that time,
which was a really useful way of breaking in a new
teacher. And then I recall we were returning from
the picnic on the 4th of July and the phone was
ringing and Glenn was calling and wanted to know if
I could come down. And I was very pleased to
indicate I was able to come down. And we came down
and I subsequently discovered that the reason the
position was open, the occupant of a position I had
gotten a little cross-purposes with the local
public school officials. And evidently, the
decision was made that perhaps that individual
ought to seek other pastures. So that opened the
position, and I was very, very pleased. And I came
as an assistant professor, which was the position
I held at the University of Illinois. Because as
you know, I came out and retired in 67 from the
military. I finished my degree. and then was
teaching there at the university for a year. So
that's why I was a little older than the average. An
organization called SOTA, Students Older Than
Average. Yes, I heard about that one. And that
didn't go over too well down here. No, I heard about
that too. I encountered that when I tried to get a
dorm room, and they said they had one for SOTAs, you
know, a floor, a special floor, and I kissed that.
So I feel that category, so I know how you feel.
Okay. Now I can dribble on like that, but I'm sure
you've got another focus. Well, that was, you
know, how you got here was one. And then once you
were here and you began as an assistant professor,
there were phenomenal changes between 1969 and
the year you retired. You served in a lot of
different positions. Can you just elaborate a
little bit on some of the major changes and what you
think brought them about? I know women was one of
the big ones that everybody refers to, but. a
little bit about administration, because you did
work under two different administrators, and the
changes that occurred as a result of that,
possibly.
The initial start of 69, as you would expect, we
were still floundering around, and there were
some organizational problems. But basically, in
the The small area that I was interested in was in
the secondary education, and they were divided as
they are still now, secondary and elementary
education.
Major change at the start in the area that I was
interested in, which is the student teaching
aspects of it. When I first started in 69, the
university
was paying a very small stipend for the
cooperating teacher, or supervisor of student
teaching. And then I think Senate Bill 12, I'm not
sure, but you can maybe check that out, which was a
change in the entire student teaching aspects of
it, where the state picked up and began pay the
individual supervising teacher, cooperating
teacher, whatever you will, the stipend, I think
it was $200. And that was a major change. It
subsequently got taken off again, didn't it? Yes,
yes, yes. Because I know our district is one of the
few that still pays it, but they just pay it. The
district itself pays it. Yes, and that's
unfortunate. I find the state putting their heavy
hands in trying to operate a college of education
in areas where they really do not belong, which is
in the area of curriculum. But in the support area
of student teaching support, it's unfortunate
that they got out of it.
That was probably one of the major changes, this
shifting over from the university supporting it
to the state supporting it. that of course
enhanced the student teaching program, and we
were able to make, I would say, good adjustments
with the local public schools. I think the
relationships we've had with both Bryan and
College Station have always been good. Now, of
course, we have moved out beyond it because of the
volume we have, and we have established some
excellent facilities, I understand, in Houston.
I believe they're trying to host them in San
Antonio. We already have 12 this semester. So
we're moving across the state, which is where we
belong. The other major change, and again, the
state comes into the picture, because the state of
Texas has had a history of attempting to control,
I think is the best word I can use, the process of
educating people to be teachers in the state of
Texas. And Texas A&M has always been in the
forefront in indicating that we are an agent of the
state and one of our functions is to turn out
students to become teachers. and that we are
professionals. We have a better feel for what is
needed than some legislature who is operating and
being pushed by various groups. And that
this position is one that should be held even to the
point of, you might say, almost political
confrontation with the state. And I speak in terms
of the confrontation the then dean, Dean Hubert,
and others had in the state when the state
attempted to impose what they called
competency-based teacher education or
performance-based teacher education as the sole
method of training teachers. This would have
created consternation
in their, and I'll use the term very clearly, in
their ignorance. They felt that they could go into
the humanities and tell the history teacher what
his or her objectives were to be and how they were to
achieve it. And of course this went over like a
proverbial lead balloon.
It eventually, and it was a long story and that's a
beautiful one for a dissertation for somebody
down the line, but eventually it was determined
that the state was way off base in doing this and
saying that was the only way it could be done. And
that shackle was released from the colleges. And I
think the college, Texas A&M University, took a
strong stand in that position and should be
congratulated
for it. I understand that today we now are facing
something similar to it, where the state is
mandating the maximum number of hours and so on and
so forth. And how this will come out, I really don't
know. But I know this, as sure as I'm sitting right
here, that the people that will be hurt are the
students in the state of Texas down the line 15, 20
years from now. We
just . are two now, and what area are we working in
specifically? Well, we're in changes that
impacted the College of Education and what might
have cost them in the external environment,
societal changes, or like you said, the
political. This was definitely all of the
political influences that you're talking about.
Philosophical, maybe there might have been some.
What? I think the philosophical basis was that
we took pride in the fact that there had been
gathered what we considered to be a top flight
faculty, and that
we indicated very strongly that the faculty
should be the ultimate decision makers as to the
curriculum needed, and not some off-campus
group. And fortunately, the administration
supported us. I'm talking about the university
administration supported the college in its
approach. And we could not have done it, I don't
believe, without the support of the university.
At that time, as it is now, the mission of the
college was still foremost, and it was the
teaching, the research, and the service. In the
two eras that you were, and I'm calling the Hubert
era and the Corrigan era because it was almost 10
distinct years for each one so far, was there a
change in emphasis on any of those? Was there more
towards research or more towards teaching, or
were they balanced fairly well under both?
administrations?
If I had to come down, I would come down and decide
that yes, in that aspect, the balance was
maintained.
One of the areas that I recall that illustrated
this was the area of what should be required of the
Ed.D. as compared to what should be required for
the Ph.D. And when the language requirements for
the Ph.D.
more or less went by the board and they brought in
other areas, statistics and other things that the
person could used to show competence to become the
PhD title. There was a language requirement you
had to take beforehand? Oh, yes. PhD required
language. And I remember vividly
everyone, of course, not everyone, most everyone
felt that that was the most difficult thing to
overcome for the PhD. And up to and including an
actual program that took place and had some
students involved in it, in which the
Czechoslovakian language department set up an
area of coursework, more or less through a summer
type of thing and other things. If the individual
showed confidence at the end of the set of programs
or courses that he or she took, they would then be
certified. And this was just one of the many ploys
that the people used trying to overcome this
hurdle. Was this a PhD in education? Was it just in
one department? Or was the PhD requirement in all
the departments very similar? The PhD
requirement in all of the departments that could
offer the PhD, it was similar. And the college
then, when this surfaced, the college went
through a pretty good
review program of what should be required. And
they came up with some very, I think, good
standards to show this. what would be required for
the PhD and what would be required for the EdD. Is
that pretty much what's in place at this time, you
think? As far as I know, I think it is. This is a
struggle that is pretty well ended by now, but many
universities went through it. I think in terms of
the University of Illinois, the University of
Illinois, for the PhD, in addition to the
language, they had a don't hold me to these
figures, would take 34 hours beyond the master's
degree was sufficient for the coursework, plus
the language. If you went the EDD route, it was 68
hours. And they just doubled the language. They
just doubled the hours requirement if you wanted
to go that way. And our college was trying to get the
distinction between the dissertation, and that
was Hubert's main point, that one of the major
things would be the dissertation would be a
completely different form for the PhD and the EdD.
And I'll do violence to his philosophy, I know, but
I'm trying to recall what it was. Basically, the
EdD could be a study that would be useful for the
practicing professional. And it could be limited
to a school district, a state, or some small area.
The PhD, I wouldn't say would have to be
impractical, but would not be limited to and would
not normally be that type of thing. But the major
thing that Dean Hubert and the faculty were after
was, some of the faculty anyway, was that the
research should be germane to the national or
international level. could be generalized, and
your sample
must be nationwide,
so that the usual way of doing your research would
not normally fill that type of thing. Now, whether
this still is in existence, I don't know, but there
was a great deal of discussion, and But that was the
major recollection I have of that area. And what
the current difference is, I don't know.
During the time that you were here as a professor
and then in the administration as well, there was
tremendous growth in the College of Education.
Did that have any effect on the way that you were
able to work with the students?
growth, the major growth, came after I kind of
moved up in 72, I believe it was, into the associate
dean office of student affairs. And the growth at
that time was
actually a problem for the college.
We were, as the university started bringing in a
goodly large number of students, some of the
students, to be brutally frank, did not belong at a
competitive university such as Texas A&M. And
after a year or so attempting some of the more
rigorous curriculum, the sciences, the
engineering, the students would find themselves
on probation, below two point, this type of thing.
And there was a feeling on the part of the campus
that the College of Education would make an ideal,
and I'm being very pejorative, dumping ground for
that type of student. And the difficulty we ran
into was that many of the students who had been
chewed up by the system really were good students
and had just made mistakes or had just not really
found themselves. And then there were a
considerable number of students who were just
flat not interested. And the problem came in that
the volume made it difficult to find out which
category a student might logically fit. So the
dean's office at the time was the control point as
to whether a student would or would not be
permitted to come into the college.
The college fought successfully to
like this control. There were actions that people
were trying to say that any student could go to any
other college and that you had to accept them. And
this was eventually determined that the college
would make the decision as to whether a student
could or could not be admitted. And that once a
student was enrolled in the university, it didn't
mean they had carte blanche to go to any college.
And it's politics, pure and simple. But the
College of Education did not need a reputation for
becoming the dumping ground for the other
students. We were attempting to establish our own
standards. One of the things that the college did,
and it was a very
thorough review before it was done, and that was to
require a 2.25 minimum grade point average. To
transfer or just to enter? To enter at the junior
level. And
the dean's office was given authority make
exceptions and so on and so forth, and put them on
probation and trials and this. We had all kinds of
varieties of ways. Do you know when that occurred,
more or less? I can find out. Ah. Early on.
Seventy-four, seventy-five, somewhere around
there. Okay, in the early seventies. And the other
colleges were not very happy about it, but we could
cite the need for competent individuals and so on
and so forth and this type of thing. Did they have
the same procedure or the same criteria as the
other colleges, or were they forced to admit
anybody they wanted to? I mean, that they wanted to
in. You mean the other colleges? Uh-huh. No,
eventually they all accepted the fact that the
college would be the determining factor. Sure.
trend was to go into the sciences and others and
then come out of them. We had a few that came into
college and then went to the sciences. In other
words, it was primarily a one-way traffic. And as I
say, we realized that many of them were excellent
students, and they became good teachers, I
believe. And others were just... Well, even now,
the numbers that Brian Cole was sharing with me
about the size of a freshman class in the College of
Education The senior is astounding. I was very
surprised. That trend, very few youngsters come
to education straight out of high school. Very
few. They come to it as a result of trying various
other areas and then finally deciding that this is
the area. And again, it's still the same problem.
Someone has to make the decision. Is the fellow or
the person, the woman, serious, or are they just
looking for a place to be able to stay in?
At the time that you were involved with the
college, was there much collaboration among the
departments within the college and then outside
of the college with others? Well, of course, the
collaboration came, and this is a distinction I
think I can make, King Hubert was sitting there,
and Dean Corrigan was sitting over here. The
collaboration came in different manners. The
major vehicle for collaboration was this
poly-pound, the policy committee meeting, which
was the meeting of the dean, the associate deans,
all the department heads. And this was usually
held, I think it was every Tuesday at 10 o'clock.
And if you have never gotten those meetings, the
copies of those meetings, it's quite likely that
they're over in the archives. And they would give
you precise data and information that you cannot
get from, you know, old Codger's recall, which is a
very poor way of recalling it. But that, if I
recall, one of the functions I had was retiring
records. and putting them into the archives, we
normally always had copies of the policy
committee meetings. And they were held weekly,
generally, pretty religiously. And this was
where the collaboration, cooperation, came
in. The style of the two deans is the point that I
think I'll move into now, and that is that with Dean
Yilbert, he had a style which was more directive in
nature. He felt that his role in the leadership of
the college was to provide the clear-cut goal and
direction, and this is the area who we should go.
And generally, he had a very clear outline of the
program that he wanted and the direction he wanted
the college to go. And the policy committee
meetings under Dean Hubert were more informative
to be told and to be made aware of areas that we were
going to move into, or areas that we were going to
change in this type of way. Who attended those? The
department heads. All the department heads, the
dean, and the associate deans.
They were actually, as I say, that was the policy
committee. They made it. But always, usually,
Hubert would bring an agenda. Frequently, there
would be a discussion type of thing But the
direction was usually fairly clear.
When Corrigan came, there was 180 degree change.
Now, a problem was outlined. And the question was,
where do we go? And it was very interesting to watch
the department head struggle with that. Because
the day before, they had not had to make these kinds
of decisions. And I admire both men. I've enjoyed
their acquaintances. But Dean Corrigan stayed
with it and forced the department heads and then
the faculty to make decisions. And completely
different styles of leadership. Two very
effective styles of leadership.
I would be... Theory-wise, what would you, how
would you... Theory-wise, you're talking to a man
who spent most of his adult life in the military. I
like a leader who says, there it is, that's what
we're going for, let's go. Let's talk about it, but
let's go. I find that I have an old saying, it's
called the pooling of ignorance, when you get too
much of the other, because there are so many facets
to a problem that are not available for the
department head. True. So it's hard for them to be
aware. So it's really hard. I think you need a
system whereby they would